---
title: "The Year of My Linux Desktop"
date: 2025-11-09T18:50:40Z
draft: true
---

For the uninitiated, the "year of the linux desktop" is a running joke in the linux community referring to the idea that \<current year\> will be the year that Linux goes mainstream for regular desktop usage. That is to say - Linux will see widespread adoption for personal computing use amoungst behemouths such as Microsoft Windows Mac OS. While the prophecy is yet to be fulfilled, I remain hopeful that LInux will one day be a viable operating system for everyday folks.

My very first exposure to Linux was in high school. At that time, I was just discovering my love for computer programming. Based on my hours of internet research, I had come to the conclusion that linux was "good for programmers" - whatever that meant. I determined that in order to be a good programmer, I needed to be using Linux (an opinion that I still hold today, though for drastically different reasons.)

As I graduated high school and went to college to study computer science, my interest in linux stuck with me. I had started out using Ubuntu, but quickly developed a habbit of distro-hopping, hopelessly searching for that "perfect linux desktop" for me. Some memorable highlights were [Elementary OS](https://elementary.io/), [Fedora Desktop](https://fedoraproject.org/), and [Pop!_OS](https://system76.com/pop/). Pop!_OS was probably my favorite of the three due to its native support for NVIDIA drivers (a common pain point for many Linux desktop users.) But alas, the grass was always greener on the other side. I never quite found one desktop that I truly loved using. Each one seemed to have some quirk that wasn't quite right for me.

Around this time, Wayland was emerging as the next generation linux display manager. I didn't quite know what that meant at the time (and honestly I still don't have a great grasp of the concept), but one project that came across my radar through the Wayland hype train was Sway, a tiling window manager meant to usurpe i3 in the Wayland era. I didn't know what i3 or Sway or "tiling" was, but I was intrigued by the minimalism. Sway ships with literally the bare minimum required to display things on your screen. "Zero "bloatware" in my system? Just a bare-bones graphical environment where I choose all the applications to install? Seems neat!"

Little did I know, I had just stepped into a very, very deep rabbit hole. "Zero bloat" sounds like a nice concept, until you have to do a basic task like, say, connect to the freaking internet. On Gnome, I would just open the settings application, click my SSID, and put in my WiFi password. Not so with Sway! There is no settings application at all! You need a tool like `nmtui` or `iwctl` for that. Do you need a status bar to see which workspace your on or, I don't know, the *time*? Cool, you can install Waybar and read through the hundreds of options available in the configuration file. Do you want functional speakers on your computer? Well, you better get familiar with Pipewire, Pulse audio, and the half dozen supporting packages needed to get sound to come out of your machine. You even need a separate package just to put a background on your freaking desktop. I am being overly dramatic, but the point is, to a complete linux noob, this was all super overwhelming. I didn't know what I didn't know and I had trouble even figuring out what was wrong when my machine wasn't working as I wanted it to. It was cool for sure, but it was also painful - a far cry from the install-and-go nature of the distros from the big players.

After a few years of wiping and reconfiguring my laptop every few months, I finally just settled for Fedora desktop. Fedora ships with the Gnome desktop environment, which was "boring", but also stable well maintained. Having borked my setup on several occasions trying to tweak things myself, I gained an appreciation for the simplicity of the Fedora/Gnome experience. With almost no extra configuration after installation, everything seemed to "just work" out of the box on all my systems. For quite some time, I was on the Fedora bandwagon.

And then DHH released [Omarchy](https://github.com/basecamp/omarchy). Unlike established options like Ubuntu and Fedora, Omarchy is not a linux "distribution" in the purest sense of the word. It is essentially an Arch system with some preinstalled applications, configuration files, and an arsenal of bash scripts to help the user perform common tasks.

When Omarchy was first released, the install process was a bit unique. The installation instructions first have you install Arch linux using the `archinstall` helper command, selecting a few specific configuration options to prepare the system for Omarchy. Then, you would run a curl command to download the Omarchy configuration files and scripts. Finally, simply run the install scripts, reboot the system, and you've got a fully functional, fully configured desktop environment. (This process has all since been abstracted away and an Omarchy ISO is now available to use.) At a high level, Omarchy isn't a distribution, but a reproducable set of instructions generate a desktop environment to a given specification. 